Enhance `ColorPickerWidget` (#5585)
plone/volto: docs/source/recipes/how-to-use-color-picker-widget.md

Reviewer: The only place I found this as a title in Plone 6 docs is this: https://6.docs.plone.org/volto/recipes/environment-variables.html. Even then, that filename lacks "how-to-". Almost everything in docs is a "how to", and it does not really add anything.

"How to" in the `html_meta` stuff, in the narrative text, and in sub-headings (but not titles) is fine.

Are there other places in Plone 6 docs? I don't know about Plone 5 and earlier.

Anyway let's not get ahead of ourselves with docs reorganization stuff.

Author: <img width="344" alt="image" src="https://github.com/plone/volto/assets/486927/9b1ec2de-bda9-4a9e-b88e-27281668b99f">

Author: ok, let's rename this then.

Author: Renamed and added to the TOC.

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description": "How to use the color picker widget in blocks settings and forms"
    "property=og:description": "How to use the color picker widget in blocks settings and forms"
    "property=og:title": "How to use the color picker widget"
    "keywords": "Volto, Plone, frontend, React, blocks, forms, widget, color, picker"
---

# How to use the color picker widget

> 

Reviewer: I am guessing on the version in which the color picker was added. I think it is 16.0.0 based on this PR: https://github.com/plone/volto/pull/3269

````suggestion

```{versionadded} 16.0.0
```

````

Author: IMHO, adding a versionadded is fine for new items, doing it for everything is useless, imagine we had to add in for every single existing feature... Here, this info is not relevant, since for me it's been there forever.

Reviewer: I agree that adding a `version*` admonition for anything prior to 16.0.0 and its alphas would be silly at this point. I don't know when the color picker was added, but you make it sound like it's been around long before 16.x.x.

For 16.x.x, only because we still maintain it, I think we should make an effort to include it, but I'll leave it to you as a judgment call.

For 17.x.x, we should definitely make an effort.

> Volto comes with a color picker widget that can be used in any Volto form.

Author: No, they are not. They are the same. What did lead you to think that it's different?
I will add the reference.

> Volto comes with a color picker widget that can be used in any Volto form.

Reviewer: Added a comment in a new review.

  },
});

export const defaultStylingSchema = ({ schema, formData, intl }) => {
  const BG_COLORS = [
    { name: 'transparent', label: 'Transparent' },
    { name: 'grey', label: 'Grey' },
  ];

  // You could allow passing the color definition from the config or from the default
  // defined above
  const colors =
    config.blocks?.blocksConfig?.[formData['@type']]?.colors || BG_COLORS;

  // Same for the default used (or undefined)
  const defaultBGColor =
    config.blocks?.blocksConfig?.[formData['@type']]?.defaultBGColor;

  // This adds the StylingWrapper support to your block
  addStyling({ schema, intl });

  // Then we add the field to the fieldset inside the StylingWrapper `styles` field schema fieldset array
  schema.properties.styles.schema.fieldsets[0].fields = [
    ...schema.properties.styles.schema.fieldsets[0].fields,
    'backGroundColor',
  ];

  // and finally, we add the field to the StylingWrapper `styles` object field schema properties
  schema.properties.styles.schema.properties['backGroundColor'] = {
    widget: 'color_picker',
    title: intl.formatMessage(messages.backgroundColor),
    colors,
    default: defaultBGColor,
  };

  return schema;
};
```

> The widget name the color picker widget uses is `color_picker`.

Author: Not really, I want to express that the discriminator name is `color_picker`, and not anything else. If you don't use it, you don't get it.

## Color definitions

> 

Reviewer: I'm not sure what version this enhancement will go in, so adjust accordingly.

````suggestion
```{versionchanged} 17.x.x
Enhanced `ColorPickerWidget` with additional color definitions, saving it as an object instead of a string.
```
````

The `colors` property of the widget controls which colors are available to choose in the widget.
This is the signature of the object:

```ts
type Color =
  | {
      label: string;
      style: Record<`--${string}`, string> & { name: string };
    }
  | {
      name: string;
      label: string;
    };

const colors: Color[] = [

>   { style: { name: 'red', '--background-color': 'red' }, label: 'red' },

Reviewer 2: Why is `name` included as part of `style` when it's not a CSS property?

Author: I know, I'm not 100% sure too... We need a string value still, for backwards compatibility since we need it here and there in the rendered HTML in the widget. It also serves a double purpose, since it also turns into an injected class name, in case you need it too. The code to comply with BW compat was also simpler, so I left it there. We could lift it to the main object, although and if you still need the class name for some reason, then manually add it.

Reviewer 2: Oh, it's a class name? That would be more obvious if it were called `className`. It still feels a bit weird to me to have it inside `style`, but if it's needed for backwards compatibility...

Author: not a class name, but as it's not a custom CSS property (it does not start with `--`), it comes for free... because of the stylewrapper (which takes all what's inside and does its thing). It's more a convention... I'd be ok and try to move it to top. I can work on this these days.

Author: @davisagli I've moved the `name` key to the top, it makes more sense as you said, and the benefits are not that much in the other form. Please, take a look!

Author: @giuliaghisini I've modified a bit the definitions as per David's request, please take another quick look!

  {
    style: { name: 'yellow', '--background-color': 'yellow' },
    label: 'yellow',
  },
  { name: 'green', label: 'green' },
]
```

## Using basic definitions

The basic color definition is the one that saves a string label as the widget value.
You can use it on your own code by reading it from the resultant data and use it according your designed solution.

> In the case of using it along with the StyleWrapper, the value will be injected as a class name of the form:

Reviewer: This sentence needs to provide an abstraction of the form or pattern. I am totally guessing that this is the correct pattern. Please correct it as needed.

```suggestion
When combined with the `StyleWrapper`, the value will be injected as a class name of the form `has--PROPERTY_NAME--PROPERTY_VALUE`:
```

```html
<div class="has--backgroundColor--ee22ee">
  ...
</div>
```

Then you should create the CSS rules according to these injected class names.

> ## Using custom CSS properties as color definitions

Reviewer: Another child.

```suggestion
### Custom CSS properties as color definitions
```

> The `style` key defines a set of custom CSS properties to be saved as widget value.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you intend here with "to be saved as widget value", but I think you meant this.

```suggestion
The `style` key defines a set of custom CSS properties to be added as the value to the HTML attribute `style`.
```

> They will be injected by the StyleWrapper as style definitions and you will be able to use them in your CSS rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They will be injected by the `StyleWrapper` as style definitions, so you can use them in your CSS rules.
```

```html

> <div class="block teaser" style="--background-color': 'red'">

Reviewer: Is `'red'` actually quoted in the output? And there's an extra `'`.

```suggestion
<div class="block teaser" style="--background-color: red">
```

...
</div>
```

```css
.block.teaser {
  background-color: var(--background-color, transparent);
}
```

The `name` key is mandatory in order to generate proper markup in the resultant HTML in both forms.

> It is also included by the StyleWrapper as a injected class name, in case you need it too in your CSS selectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also included by the `StyleWrapper` as an injected class name, in case you need it in your CSS selectors.
```

> You can also use this selector in case it comes in handy:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use this selector, where an element with class names `block` and `teaser` with a child element whose HTML attribute `style` contains the value of `--background-color`:
```

```css
.block.teaser {
  &[style*='--background-color'] {
     padding: 20px 0;
 }
 ```

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion

```{seealso}
See the MDN CSS Reference for selectors.

- [Attribute selectors](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Attribute_selectors)
- [`&` nesting selector](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Nesting_selector)
```

````

## Use both basic and custom CSS properties definitions

> You can combine both basic and style definitions, it's up to you how to mix and match them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can combine both basic and custom CSS properties definitions.
It's up to you how to mix and match them.
```
